A BIG THANK YOU TO: 
1. my family for putting up with me staying up late / getting up early to work on this 
2. my parents, especially for buying pokemon gold for me so long ago 
3. Artists: Pokets3, PeanutellaX, Accad501 , carabara-bonanza, 
	the Polished Crystal dev team, Azure Keys, Prism, SageDeoxys, Bloodless/Rosie, Sour Crystal, 
4. Beta testers & beta team, MissingNoVGC has played through game maybe more than I have, catching bugs and was a huge support from the early days ... 

Other fangames to shout out:
	* Ambrosia: playthrough now, so many features, custom dex with fan favorite species ... Battle Puzzles that get you to fight through, eg, Star Wars ... really feels like new ground was broken in making this hack, things I had no idea were possible in the gen 2 engine. It's got a reputation as being really hard but honestly I don't think that's the case after you do the first fetch quest, its generally quite fair, and there is an easy mode if that's how you want to play. 
	* Aaron's Low Budget: Three regions, tons of pokemon, mega pokemon, ...
	* Johto Legends: True prequel to Gen 2, an ending that blew my mind, play through johto in reverse with dratini or larvitar as your starter 
	* Peridot: Totally new region, a really fun expert mode, tons of beta mon that are fun to use. It's got a really expansive postgame battle facility 
	* Seasons: Beautiful fakemon, can't wait to see them in action 

* favorite pokemon? 
	without a doubt cyndaquil... 
	it's the first mon you see when you boot up the game, and I even broke convention and gave the fire starter dex # 001 .... 
	growing up ... outside of town, huge field in the back ... 1 hr screen time ... playing pkmn gold ... after that ... just running around with him ... 
	lots of Kurt's letters reference this cyndaquil ... not exactly auto-biographical ... but definitely inspired by my own journey, growing up but wanting to hold on to nostalgia ... 
	I still remember the first time I beat the elite four with it ... probably like level 60 or something ... on the way to school, finally beating lance ... 
	
	I never had the Fire Red games growing up ... I swapped my ruby game for my friends fire red, and then one night my mom caught me playing under the covers ... so I lost that cart, and my friend wouldn't trade me back ... until I was in high school and could sneak in to game stop to buy one of the gen 4 games ... 

* problem w traditional games? 
	the amazing thing about rom hacks is that they really up the stakes and the complexity of the story compared to the main line games ... mainline is literally for grade schoolers: evil team, legendary pokemon, explore & talk to people ... but with rom hacks you can tell a more complicated story 
	when I was wanting to tell my story, I was caught between two eras: being uncomfortable with the future while feeling like the modernity of my childhood wasn't so bad. I grew to appreciate that my parents, probably my grandparents, felt the same way ... there's the era just before me that wasn't as comfortable with the internet, etc., and then there's the era ahead of me, which feels like it's moving way too fast ... this game was a way that I was able to explore that paradox: every generation gets comfortable with the technology it's born into while feeling like the next wave is going to cause irreparable social harms ... it's not like you're getting something crazy complex in these romhacks but you do get something that has a plot targeted at someone older. 
	I had to really grapple with why tradition and rituals have been so common in human history ... is it just because it reinforces whatever power structure already exists? or is there any other value in it? ... the conclusions I came to is that tradition reminds you that whatever challenges you face, they have been faced before ... the feeling that this situation has been faced before and it can be overcome ... 
	can you pull up those maps I sent? ... with a game like this you can really explore themes more deeply than the mainline games do ... 
		each of the chapters, if you will, in the game showcase this theme that the problems of the present have been faced by people in the past ... the very first plot point is about the ilex forest being threatened by this external force, the drought is endangering the forest, the trees are dying, and they're being logged by sylph ... Kurt sees any instance of modernity as threatening, especially the rival's distillation column to get the charcoal aromas ... 
		but in the historic ilex, we have a twist: there's still this external environmental threat, the pineco infestation ... the historic elder Silas can't stop it on his own, and there's this new invention by the character Ursula ... Ursula demonstrates to Silas that her technique isn't going to harm the forest, and lets the village adapt to the situation ... In the end of that part of the story, Silas does what Kurt can't do, which is to accept a new technology that lets them manage their relationship with the forest better ... 
		in another instance, the region of historic Goldenrod -- gauldenrod -- has its wetlands transformed into a stadium ... the stadium was really influenced by the coliseum in ancient rome ... the coliseum is a place where dissidents are mocked, beaten senseless, to show how powerful and magnificent Tyrus and his soldiers are ... this is just a form of toxic entertainment ... 
		in modern Goldenrod, whitney takes on the role as the toxic entertainer ... her show, sponsored by sylph by the way, is all about making the viewer believe they are as magnificent as whitney, and that anyone outside her system is mocked or made to be the villain or causing the Johto drought ... 

* Why crystal? 
	Gen 2 has a special place in my heart ... 
	the story of crystal just sort of called to me ... crystal is about a region that is holding on to the past as time is passing it by ... thats sort of the way I feel ... 
	in crystal, you have some maps like Violet, Ecruteak, that are undeniably historic ... but then you also have the modern Goldenrod and Olivine where the modern creature comforts are intruding ... crystal & johto in particular is the proper setting for this story ...
	something I find with gen 2 is that the limits of the sprite give them a certain charm ... it's the difference between hearing live music and listening to a HiFi CD ... live music, you can literally see the musicians strumming, improvising, ... in gen 2 the sprites, you can literally see the pixels, you can see how the artists did it ... 
		in the htyphlosion pic, maybe you can pull it up, but there's major limitaitons ... you get four colors: black, white, and two more ... in the htyplosion pic, you see how the artist here blended the purple and tan to make the flame appear dynamic ... 
	if I was going to remake the game from scratch, I might use a more modern base that lets me get a few more species in, but I'd still use gen 2 ... you are really forced to go on a budget w/r/t features ... even text boxes: you get to show up to 36 characters at a time in most of them ... 
		in the "text" pic, you can see that there's only up to two lines, 18 characters each ... it feels like writing a haiku every time you want to make new dialogue ... but it forces you to write really, really tight ... I'm proud that I was able to fit this story into crystal without making you press A a million times ... 

* what pokemon became unexpectedly powerful? 
	oh man ... every time I ran mamoswine it was just destroying the game after the stadium section ... it ended up being so fast, so powerful, that I had to conciously prevent it from being used ... 
	on the other hand ... I tried so many times to make HDecidueye work ... but it is definitely playing on hard mode if you pick that poor little owl ... by the time it gets the fighting type you don't need it anymore ... all the water types it wants to beat just ice beam it to death ... 
	ancestor feraligar is a Zinogre by artist Accad501, ground/electric with water+ice coverage, is just ferocious ... I haven't used it but by the sound of it you can almost solo the game with it as physical or special attacker ... 
	one of the plot points is about a slowking that Chuck is using ... slowking dex entries state that its psychic waves are sustained by the poison emitted by the parasite on its head ... I gave it poison heal as a HA and that's pretty busted as well ... 


* new feature with no tech limitations? 
	making new audio in the gen 2 engine is so hard ... i know there's people who are doing it, but it's beyond me ... I dabble in the piano and used to just make up melodies, but that's not something I'm trying to do at this point ... 

* surprised about community response? 
	I've been glad that people find Kurt to be a character they can have empathy for ... kurt is portrayed throughout really as a villain, he bullies your rival into leaving, he is extremely close minded, he is almost a caricature of the old guard trying to live in some glorified past before the modern complexities, I think we all know what I mean ... yet a number of the beta testers and current players have said how much they empathized with him ... he is someone who tried to do right by his own kid, always trying to do the right thing, but got left behind, and now he's jaded and sees enemies everywhere ... he feels like his skills aren't valued anymore ... 

....	
	one of the reasons people make art is to share the way that the artist sees something with the world ... that's all an artist can hope for, is to share this perspective ... 
	for me, one of the things I wanted to promote or share was that we all have these natural gifts, but that we are discouraged from sharing ... I'm paraphrasing, but Kurt Vonnegut, author of Slaughterhouse 5, wrote in his novel form 1987 called Bluebeard: 
	"simply moderate gifts are made worthless by the radio... A moderately gifted person who would have been a community treasure a hundred years ago has to give it up, since modern communications put them into daily competition with the world's champions. A moderately gifted person has to keep their gifts all bottled up until they gets drunk at a wedding...How do we reward them? We say to them the next morning, 'Wow! Were you ever drunk last night!'"
	and it's just as true today ... i've had a lot of people tell me that the game was really special for them, that it made them feel like a kid again ... if I really did, then even for one person, then it was worth all the hours I spent on it ... 


* what inspired you to create the game? how has it evolved ? 
	I have had versions of this game on my phone's notes app for a very long time ... I first started working on it in earnest when my daughter was born about 3.5 years ago ... feeding her with the bottle takes about 30 m when they're little, so I was just writing down an overview of the plot and what the characters would be like with one hand on the bottle and another going letter by letter on my phone ... I was reading a lot of Ursula K Le Guin, author of the Disposessed and The Ones Who Walk Away from Omelas, and that was also right after I was reading George Orwell's Farewell to Catalonia ... these are accounts of utopian places and trying to make them ... 
	at the time, I was thinking about what the world would be like for my kids: what type of world would I want for them ... what attributes would I want to pass down ... in the case of the Ursula K Le Guin's The Dispossessed, it follows this anarchist society that lives on the moon, and they find that even in their perfect society, there are still problems to solve, social problems of hierarchy are nearly impossible to avoid ... 
	in the case of Farewell to Catalonia, this is George Orwells account of fighting in the Spanish Civil War ... one of the things that really stands out to me on that is how much he talks about how easy things are with modern technology and not wanting to go back, even though he has this nostalgia for the way things used to be ... I believe it's about some mechanical digging tool that speeds up the way they dig the trenches ... but that carried into the themes as well: even though he longs to not have to rely on some new technology, it saves him from manual labor ... 

	the original version of the game in my head was way more complex and probably would've gotten me a strongly worded letter from game freak ... in the current version, there's a few allusions to these anarchist cells throughout johto that are committing sabotage on Silph sites, you find these calls to action in the pokecenters written in the unown font ... I was going to have the player actively involved in these, sort of like final fantasy 7, for the modern timeline plot ... the radio tower plot was very different, the lighthouse tower plot was very different, i'll just say that ... ultimately it just felt too far out of place for a pokemon game ... in the end, a different character is the one who sabotages the lighthouse, while the radio tower plot is trimmed down significantly ... 

	when you're writing you get all these ideas of what you can do with characters and places ... I had an idea for historic violet city and the making of the sprout tower ... but when I was editing the script it was just such a slog: you finish this big stadium event, you sneak through the radio tower in the dark, and you're waiting and waiting to get to the western capital ... it just ruined the pacing ... I 


* was there a feature that didn't make it in ? 
	i'm a dex completionist ... making a gen 2 version of the dexnav is something that I wish I had but don't  ... of course it can be done but I'm not skilled enough to do it ... 


* biggest challenge with maintaining it ? 
	making puzzles that are the right challenge is a huge difficulty ... there's a section now that I think is about right, you have to go back in time in the whirl islands to make progress ... in my original plan, you were going back and forth many times, raising and lowering water levels like the water temple from Ocarina of time ... then I realized that I couldn't even solve the puzzle without a cheat sheet! It was so complicated, no one would have played it ... 
	I love puzzles, the old Zelda GBC games, but pokemon players are playing first for pokemon and second for the story and third for overworld puzzles ... I'm happy with he way it is now, but it was a lot of work to get the balance just right ... 
	I ended up putting the more complicated puzzles in optional areas, like the Cianwood cave, the western glacier, and the kimono girls' trick house ... 


* go back and change one thing ? 
	I do wish that I'd found a way to get away from going through johto in the exact same way we always do ... when I made it the first time, I thought: i'm not going to go through johto starting with falkner's badge and ending with clair! ... but it still basically follows that path of going north first then west then east ... I probably would have tried to keep the player out of the western capital / ecruteak as long as possible, probably by smuggling them up to the sinjoh camp first ... 


* what can players look forward to ? 
	in a few months I hope to have a battle facility up ... it'll be a true test of catching and battling ... this is a facility I've had in my head for a quite a while ... a kind of mix of the gen 3 battle factory and the battle pike and the battle tower ... I follow magpie labs on youtube and have been wanting to get into some of those facilities ... 


* questions for them ? 
	---why do you think that pokemon is still around and popular as ever 30 years later? 
	---if you were going to make a time capsule for someone to open 100 years from now, what games are you putting in? 	
	


